If you have money left at the end of the month,
you may be wondering whether you should save or
invest it. In a perfect world, you'll have both
savings and investments because each have a
different yet equally important role to play when
it comes to helping you improve your finances.
Your savings are there so you have money you
can access in case something unexpected happens,
like the boiler breaking down, and also for
short-term financial goals, those in the next
few years such as holidays, house deposit, or a
wedding. Investments on the other hand help with
your long-term financial security because stock
markets tend to produce better returns than cash
over time, so investing provides the potential
to increase your wealth by more than if you just
leave it all in savings. There is additional risk
involved though because stock markets fluctuate,
which is why it's important not to invest
all your money and have some savings as
well. If you're only investing for a
year or two and the stock market falls,
you've got less time for it to recover, so there's
a high chance you could lose money. However,
this is less likely to happen the
longer you keep your money invested.
So how much money do you need in savings before
you're ready to invest? Some suggest three months’
salary, others advise more, and there's no right
or wrong here because it all depends on you and
your circumstances. To work out the right amount
for you, consider things such as how much you need
to cover essential bills each month in case
you're unable to work for any reason. Also,
if you were to lose your job, how long do you
think it would take to find a new one? And is
yours the only salary coming into the household
or is there another one to fall back on? For one
person, three months’ salary might be enough; but
for somebody else they might feel they need more.
But one of the big problems here in the UK
is that even when people do have savings,
many don't go on to invest and this
is putting their future financial
security at risk because they face not having
enough money to last them through retirement.
There's lots of research about why this is and
two of the main barriers that have been identified
that people are scared of investing because of the
risk and because they think it's too complicated.
Yes, there are risks, but there
are also great potential rewards.
And there are steps you can take to reduce the
risk and reduce the chance of losing money. Now,
I've already talked about the importance of time
here. But another key thing is diversification.
You can spread the risk by holding a broad
range of investments. After all no single
investment will be the top performer all
of the time and in all economic conditions.
So by holding a good spread the hope is that if
one part of your portfolio isn't doing so well,
you'll have other investments that are
faring better offsetting any losses.
Many people also worry that investing is
complicated and not suitable for them. But
once they look into it in more detail and
get started, they often realise it's not
as complex as it can first appear and there
are plenty of resources to help. At Barclays,
we produce lots of content: articles, videos,
and podcasts that are all free and available
to anyone. We also have a research centre to
help customers with their investment decisions.
Complexity and risks aren't the only things
that can put people off investing though.
The fact we talk about it being something to
help you in the future rather than the near
term also means that other things can feel more
important, which is totally understandable.
But the sooner you start, the more likely
you are to achieve your longer-term goals
and the easier it will be because you won't
have to invest as much each month. Finally,
whether you're at the stage of building up your
savings or are in a position to invest too,
putting away money monthly is a great habit to get
into and it will help you reach your goals sooner.